<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Epilogue</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="epilogue" epub:type="epilogue">
			<h2 epub:type="title">
        Epilogue
      </h2>
			<p>A year elapsed.</p>
			<p>One night, when Brontu was away from home, Aunt Martina heard, or thought she heard, a low murmur of voices in Giovanna’s room. Had Brontu come back? the old woman wondered, and if so, why? Could anything have happened at the sheepfolds?</p>
			<p>Tormented by the thought, she finally got up. The door was open, and she listened a moment. Yes, undoubtedly some one was talking in Giovanna’s room. Not wishing to strike a light, she attempted to cross the room that separated her own chamber from Giovanna’s, in the dark. She made a misstep, however, and, trying to recover herself, overthrew a chair. “Holy Mary!” she muttered, setting it right again. Then she groped her way to the door, felt for the handle, and tried to open it. It was locked.</p>
			<p>“What do you want?” demanded Giovanna’s voice instantly.</p>
			<p>“Has Brontu got back?”</p>
			<p>“No; why?”</p>
			<p>“I thought I heard some one talking. Why have you got the door locked?”</p>
			<p>“Is it locked? I must have done it without thinking,” said Giovanna innocently. “I’ll open it right away; just wait a moment. I was talking to the baby; she wouldn’t go to sleep.”</p>
			<p>“Mariedda!” called the grandmother. But there was no response.</p>
			<p>“Is she asleep now?”</p>
			<p>“She is just falling asleep.”</p>
			<p>In the pause that ensued a painful drama was enacted in the breasts of the two women.</p>
			<p>“I will get up now and open the door,” said Giovanna presently in a strained voice. But the old woman made no reply. Motionless, a cold chill creeping through her, she <em>felt</em> the horrible truth flash into her mind like a sudden glare of blinding light. Giovanna must have a lover, and that lover could be none other than Costantino Ledda. In that moment of searching illumination a thousand little incidents to which she had paid no heed at the time, a thousand little unconsidered trifles, rose up to confront her, and she trembled from head to foot, in a paroxysm of grief and rage. Yet, when Giovanna repeated: “I will open the door right away,” she was able to control herself, and answer quietly:</p>
			<p>“It’s not worth while; stay where you are.”</p>
			<p>Then she turned, and, crossing the room again in the dark, said to herself with a sort of calm fury: “Now is the time to show them that old Martina is no fool!”</p>
			<p>Her first impulse was to hurry downstairs and look out to see if any one had climbed from Giovanna’s window to the roof below, which, in turn, gave on another and still lower roof. But she restrained herself, reflecting very sensibly that if Giovanna saw that she was suspected she would instantly be on her guard. “No, no; this is a time to dissemble, old Martina; to pretend, spy, listen, watch—and then?” What was to happen afterwards? The <em>afterwards</em> suggested such a multitude of wretched possibilities that the old woman threw herself on her bed in a torment of agonised conjecture.</p>
			<p>What would Brontu do if he knew? Poor Brontu! With all his violent temper he was such a good fellow at bottom, and so tremendously in love with Giovanna! But there it was; he was so much in love with Giovanna that he would be perfectly capable of committing some crime should he suspect her constancy. Then, what would become of him? thought Aunt Martina. “Ah, it will be far better for him to know nothing of all this trouble. I will implore Giovanna to be loyal, and not to betray her poor husband. And then⁠—suppose, after all, I should be mistaken! Suppose she really was talking to the baby! Eh, no, no! Some one else was there, and it could have been no one but Costantino. Oh, wretched creature! accursed beggar! Is this your gratitude towards those who have fed and clothed and nourished you? But never mind, we will pay you back! We will drive you out of this house with a whip, naked as when you came into it!” And thus, torn by successive impulses of hatred, pity, fury, and despair. Aunt Martina dragged through the weary night.</p>
			<p>One significant circumstance she did recall—that Costantino was said to be on good terms with Aunt Bachissia, Giovanna’s mother. Some time previously he had set to work in earnest; had rented a little shop, and was making a good deal of money by his trade of shoemaking. A repulsive thought came into the old woman’s head. What if Aunt Bachissia knew and encouraged her daughter’s intimacy with her first husband! “The old harpy detests us,” said Brontu’s mother to herself. “Perhaps Costantino makes her presents!”</p>
			<p>Daybreak found her still wide-eyed and sleepless. Getting up, she went out to examine the wall above which rose the roofs leading to Giovanna’s window. Not a trace was to be found of any one having been on it. The dawn was exquisitely tranquil and beautiful; the village was still asleep, and the fields lay bathed in soft grey haze beneath a silver sky. Aunt Martina drew a deep breath; she felt as though she had awakened from a horrible dream; the utter peace and serenity of the early morning seemed to communicate itself to her distracted spirit. Then, on a sudden, happening to raise her eyes to Giovanna’s window, she saw the young woman watching her. Instantly the conviction flashed across her that she too had lain awake the entire night; that she too was looking now to see if any tell-tale traces remained to betray the fact that she had had a visitor, and more than that, that she now was fully aware of Aunt Martina’s suspicions. Across the space that divided them, the two women exchanged a look of mutual fear and hatred. War was declared!</p>
			<p>The battle opened in ominous calm, each side marshalling its forces in silence and secrecy. Aunt Martina’s efforts were directed to allaying Giovanna’s suspicions in the hope that she might some day surprise her and her lover together. Giovanna, perfectly awake to her mother-in-law’s tactics, pretended not to notice anything, but at the same time proceeded with great caution in her relations with Costantino.</p>
			<p>He had entirely altered his mode of life; he now worked regularly, and was doing very well; but underneath everything was a sense of unutterable melancholy, which he was never able wholly to throw off.</p>
			<p>“I am doing everything I can to provoke Brontu to break with me,” said Giovanna one day. “I want him to apply for a divorce, so as to be rid of me; then I will go back to you, beloved, and nothing shall ever part us again. I will be your servant, your slave⁠—and make you forget all your past sorrows.”</p>
			<p>But Costantino only smiled wearily. It was true that he still loved Giovanna, but it was a very different kind of love from that which she had formerly inspired in him. Now, there was more of passion, perhaps, but it did not go so deep, and he knew, though he could not tell her so, that even were she free to return to him as his wife, he could never be happy again as in the old days. She was not the woman to whom he had given his heart, but another and a very different person. One who, having been false to both husbands in succession, was now, perhaps, deceiving them simultaneously.</p>
			<p>Often Costantino was seized with an access of rage against the entire human race, Giovanna included. He would have liked to murder some one—Brontu, or Aunt Bachissia, or even Giovanna, in order to avenge himself for what he had been made to suffer. And yet, all the time, he knew himself to be quite incapable of doing anything brutal or violent, and raged and fumed the more at his own weakness. His heart seemed to have sunk into a state of torpor, and to have lost the power to enjoy acutely.</p>
			<p>Uncle Isidoro was now constantly urging him to marry again, much as such an act would be contrary to his own principles.</p>
			<p>“I have one wife already,” Costantino would reply. “What could I do with another? Have her betray me too? All women are exactly alike.”</p>
			<p>Then Uncle Isidoro would sigh, and remain silent. He was in constant dread lest some new tragedy should befall. He was aware, partly from intuition and partly because Costantino himself allowed him to have an inkling of the truth, that the young man was holding secret intercourse with his former wife, and his daily fear was of some explosion. Thus, he argued to himself that if Costantino could only be induced to marry some gentle, affectionate young woman, who would bear him children, he would come in time to forget the other one, and find rest and peace. To these suggestions, however, Costantino only gave the same weary smile that had now become habitual.</p>
			<p>“Are you afraid that I will murder some one?” he asked, divining the old man’s nervous terrors. “No, no; there is no need to feel alarmed now; matters are going too much to my taste just at present for me to do anything to disturb the current.”</p>
			<p>The current was, however, in a fair way to be disturbed after that night on which Aunt Martina made her discovery.</p>
			<p>On the following day Costantino went, as his frequent custom now was, to Aunt Bachissia’s cottage.</p>
			<p>He had no liking for the old woman who had been chiefly instrumental in bringing about Giovanna’s divorce; there were even moments when the thought of strangling his ex-mother-in-law got into his blood, filling his veins with a sensation of almost voluptuous joy. But he went there, nevertheless, mainly because he took a dreary pleasure in living over the past in that little cottage where he had once been so happy. Moreover, he enjoyed listening to Aunt Bachissia’s never-ending abuse of everything connected with the house of Dejas.</p>
			<p>Did the old woman know of her daughter’s renewed relations with Costantino? Neither of them had said a word to her on the subject; yet, like Isidoro, she suspected how matters stood, though, unlike him, she made no effort to interfere. Costantino had made her a present of a pair of shoes, and from time to time he performed other little services for her. Had he asked her to allow him to meet Giovanna in her house, it is quite possible that she would have offered no objection; but up to the present time he had neither told nor asked her anything.</p>
			<p>On this day, however, he arrived visibly anxious and perturbed, and Aunt Bachissia, who was sitting by the door spinning, laid down her spindle and gave him a steady look out of her sharp little eyes.</p>
			<p>Night was falling, and Costantino, who had worked hard all day, was tired, sad, unhappy. The soft brilliance of the summer night, the silence of the little house, the peaceful solitude of the common, the warm, sweet breath of the evening, all combined to create a flood of homesickness for the past, and an acute sense of present misery that was well-nigh unbearable. He threw himself down on a stool and rested his elbows on his knees and his forehead on his interlocked hands. For a few moments neither of them spoke; the man was thinking of Malthineddu, of his little dead child; he seemed to see him then, playing before the door, and hot tears trembled in his eyes.</p>
			<p>“Do you know,” said Aunt Bachissia suddenly, “the old colt is going crazy?”</p>
			<p>“Who?” asked Costantino.</p>
			<p>“Who? Why, the old miser, Martina Dejas. She got up out of her bed last night, and went and banged on my Giovanna’s door. She said she heard some one talking to her. Upon my soul, fancy such a thing! She has gone entirely mad; she always was half so.”</p>
			<p>“Ah!” was all that Costantino said.</p>
			<p>“Listen, my soul,” said Aunt Bachissia, lowering her voice. “Giovanna tells me that the old colt suspects⁠—”</p>
			<p>“What?” asked Costantino, raising his head quickly.</p>
			<p>“Suspects that you and Giovanna⁠—you understand? She has not said a word, the old maniac, but Giovanna has guessed that she has some idea in her head, and on that account—”</p>
			<p>“I understand,” said Costantino.</p>
			<p>He did understand. Evidently Giovanna had taken this method of warning him that they would have to be prudent.</p>
			<p>“And so, my soul,” Aunt Bachissia went on, “for the present it will be as well for you to stop coming here⁠—just so as not to arouse suspicions. I will go every once in a while to see you⁠—for a chat, you know. Ah!” she gave a weary sigh, “you—yes, you are a man! Look at you, standing there now, as tall and handsome as a banner! When I think of that little freak of nature—Brontu Dejas⁠—I declare, I wonder what on earth Giovanna could have been thinking of to⁠—forget you. Ah, if she had only listened to me!”</p>
			<p>Costantino, who had risen and was standing in the doorway, crimsoned with anger when he heard these outrageous lies being calmly offered for his acceptance.</p>
			<p>“Hold your tongue,” he began in a hoarse voice. But Aunt Bachissia was not listening; she was looking intently up at the white house; presently she whispered: “Look, my soul, we are being watched now. Giovanna is right. Do you see the old harpy peering at us? Oh! I could tear out her eyes!”</p>
			<p>Sure enough the figure of Aunt Martina could be seen lurking in the shadow of the portico. For the moment Costantino, who had never really borne any especial ill-will towards Brontu’s mother, felt all the anger, and sorrow, and rebelliousness in his nature concentrate into one bitter longing to do the old woman some bodily harm. He would dearly have liked to make a wild dash across the common, fall upon her without warning, and tear her eyes out, as Aunt Bachissia had said.</p>
			<p>“Never mind, let her alone,” said the latter. “Giovanna has told me that she is doing everything she can to make them ill-use her and drive her out of the house. Then we will apply for another divorce⁠—you, my soul, all you have to do is to be careful and⁠—wait.”</p>
			<p>“What have I to wait for?” he asked roughly. “Nothing can happen now that <em>I</em> want.”</p>
			<p>She said something more, but he was not listening. Standing erect and motionless on the threshold of the door that had once been <em>his</em> door, he stared across at the portico of the Dejas house, feeling even more desolate and forlorn than usual. So, then, his one remaining consolation, that of holding intercourse with Giovanna, was about to be torn from him, and by the same people who had stolen from him everything else that made life pleasant; moreover they might deprive him even of life itself should he continue his relations with her who really was his own wife!</p>
			<p>Ah, Dejas! accursed race! Yes, now the old mother as well was included in his hatred of that house, and the longing to cross the common, fling himself on the portico, and make the still summer evening resound with her shrill screams of agony, at last overmastered him. With a sudden movement, right in the middle of one of Aunt Bachissia’s sentences, he stepped out into the twilight, and with rapid strides began to cross the common. When he had gone about half-way, he stopped, stood motionless for a moment, and then, altering his direction, walked away. Aunt Bachissia watched his figure as it was slowly swallowed up by the shadows; and the silence and languor of the dusk deepened into night.</p>
			<p>After that evening Costantino visited her cottage no more.</p>
			<p>One day, towards the end of October, Uncle Isidoro Pane had an unexpected visitor. The old fisherman, seated before his fireplace, was getting supper ready for himself and Costantino, who still made his home with him. Outside, the air felt almost cold, the wind was rising, and long, violet-coloured clouds were flying across the clear, greenish, western sky. Uncle Isidoro was thinking sadly of that evening when, amid the chanting of the women, they had interred Giacobbe Dejas in the dungheap. The earthen pot bubbled on the fire, and from without came the melancholy rustling of the fig-tree and the bushes, shaken by the wind. All at once a low knock came on the door.</p>
			<p>“Who is there?” asked Uncle Isidoro.</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="la">Ave Maria!</i>” The salutation came from Aunt Martina Dejas, who now, after satisfying herself that the old man was entirely alone, entered and cautiously closed the door behind her.</p>
			<p>“Oh, Martina! <i xml:lang="it">razia plena!</i>” responded the fisherman, astonished to see who his visitor was.</p>
			<p>Her head and shoulders were completely enveloped in a petticoat worn in lieu of a shawl; her features were paler and more gaunt even than ordinary, and to Isidoro she seemed to have aged greatly.</p>
			<p>“Sit down, Martina Dejas,” said he politely, offering her a stool. “What good wind blows you here?”</p>
			<p>“It’s an ill wind,” she replied. Then, looking all around her, she said: “I want to talk to you privately; can any one hear us? Where is <em>he</em>?”</p>
			<p>“Still at the shop; he does not get back till later.”</p>
			<p>“Listen,” said the old woman, seating herself; “you can probably guess what it is that brings me here?”</p>
			<p>“No, I cannot guess, Martina Dejas,” declared the other, though all the time he knew very well. “But why didn’t you send for me? I would have gone to your house.”</p>
			<p>“At my house there is some one who has the ears of a hare; she can hear through a stone wall. Now, listen⁠—I don’t suppose I have to make you promise not to tell any one? You wouldn’t betray my confidence, would you?”</p>
			<p>“I will not betray you.”</p>
			<p>“You are a man of the Lord, Isidoro Pane; a very dreadful thing has happened; will you help me to set it right?”</p>
			<p>“If I can,” he said, spreading out his arms and hands. “Tell me about it!”</p>
			<p>The old woman sighed.</p>
			<p>“Tell you about it! Yes,” she said, “that is what I am going to do, Isidoro; but what I have to say burns my lips, and you are the only human being I would breathe it to. A terrible misfortune has overtaken my house. Do you see how old I have grown? For months I have not been able to close my eyes. Giovanna, my daughter-in-law, has a lover—Costantino Ledda. You don’t seem surprised!” she added quickly, seeing that the other remained unmoved. “You knew it already! Some one has known about it! Perhaps there are others too⁠—perhaps every one knows the disgrace of my house!”</p>
			<p>“Easy, easy; don’t be frightened. I did not know it, and I don’t think any one else does. It may not be true, either, but if it were, and people knew about it—no one would be surprised.”</p>
			<p>“No one would be surprised!”</p>
			<p>“Certainly not, Martina Dejas; no one at all. Every one knows perfectly well—pardon me if I speak frankly⁠—that Giovanna married your son entirely from motives of self-interest. Now Costantino has come back; <em>they</em> were in love with one another <em>before</em>, and now they are in love with one another <em>after</em>; it is perfectly natural.”</p>
			<p>“It is perfectly natural! How can you say such things, Isidoro Pane? Is it perfectly natural for a woman to be unfaithful? For a beggar taken in out of the streets to betray her benefactors? Is it perfectly natural that my son, Brontu Dejas, who had the courage to do what not another soul would have dreamed of doing⁠—is it natural that he should be deceived?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, it is all natural.”</p>
			<p>“Ah,” exclaimed Aunt Martina, getting up, her eyes flashing with anger, “then it was quite useless for me to come here!”</p>
			<p>“Easy, easy!” said the old man again. “Just sit down, Martina, and tell me quietly what brought you. Let us put all these questions aside⁠—they are of no use now, anyhow—and discuss the situation as it is. I think I can guess what it is you want me to do; you want me to use my influence with Costantino to get him to leave your family in peace⁠—?”</p>
			<p>The old woman sat down again, and opened her heart. Yes, that was what she wanted, that Isidoro should do all he could to induce Costantino to give Giovanna up.</p>
			<p>“This misery will kill me,” she said in conclusion, her voice trembling; “but at least my Brontu will have been spared. Ah, if he should ever find out about it, he is lost! He is sure to kill some one, either Giovanna or Costantino. I am continually haunted by the most horrible presentiments; I keep seeing a smear of blood before my eyes. You will see, Isidoro; you will see! If we don’t find some way to stop this shameful thing, some horrible tragedy will occur⁠—!”</p>
			<p>As she talked, Aunt Martina had been growing steadily paler, until she was now quite livid; her lips trembled, and her eyes gleamed partly with anger, partly with unshed tears.</p>
			<p>“You alarm me, and you make me feel very sorry for you as well,” said Uncle Isidoro gravely. “But see here, whose fault is it all? I remember—this visit of yours brings it all back to me—another visit I once had; it was from Giacobbe Dejas, poor soul. Well, he sat there, just where you are sitting now, and he said almost the same words: ‘We must find some way to stop this thing; if we don’t, some terrible misfortune will surely happen!’ And so we did; we tried our best to stop that shameful thing, but without avail. You and your son, and all the rest of you, were determined to bring about your own ruin. You fell into mortal sin; you broke the laws of God, and now your punishment has come!”</p>
			<p>“We! only we!” exclaimed the old woman haughtily. “No; the fault belongs to them as well. To Bachissia Era, for her avarice and wickedness in throwing her daughter at Brontu; and to Giovanna, for abandoning her first husband when she loved him, and marrying another out of self-interest! The blame belongs equally to all, or, rather, it does not; it is <em>theirs</em> alone, for we did nothing but what was good. It is theirs, theirs, and I hate every one of them⁠—vile, low-born beggars⁠—traitors. And I can tell you, if Costantino does not give this thing up, he’ll bitterly regret it. Beg, implore, adjure him! Tell him not to bring ruin on a respectable house, and then⁠—if he will not listen⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Hush, Martina,” begged the fisherman, seeing that she was working herself into a fury. “Don’t talk foolishness. But tell me, are you really certain that Giovanna and Costantino are meeting each other?”</p>
			<p>“Absolutely certain. For three months now, as I told you, I have hardly closed my eyes. One night I heard some one talking to Giovanna. She saw right away that I had noticed something, and for a while she was on her guard. But now⁠—now she has thrown aside all prudence. The other day they met at Bachissia Era’s cottage; I saw them plainly; and not only that, I heard them; I listened at the door. Then, last night he was with her again; do you understand? actually in my house, beneath my roof! And I⁠—I was trembling so with rage I hardly knew what I was about; but I waited for him below; I was going to speak to him, and then I was going to stab him⁠—kill him, if I could⁠—I had a knife ready in my hand. But do you know, I could not stir a limb! I could not even open my lips when he crept down as stealthily as a thief, first on to the roof, and then the ground, and away! Ah, I am nothing but a poor old woman; I can’t do a thing. I was just frightened, and I hid. Giovanna knows that I care more for Brontu than for anything else in the world, and that I would sacrifice everything to spare him, even the honour of our name. And so the ungrateful creature is taking advantage of the tenderest feeling that I have. She is counting on my being afraid to tell him for fear that he will commit murder, and so be ruined forever, and that is why she dares to carry it on. But I—I⁠—Isidoro, I will be capable of doing almost anything if Costantino does not break this off. Tell him so.”</p>
			<p>“But why don’t you speak to Giovanna?” asked the fisherman.</p>
			<p>“Because⁠—well, I’m afraid of her. She follows me about and watches me all the time like a tigress ready to spring. She hates me, just as I hate her at times; and at the very first word she would fly at me and choke me to death. I don’t dare to open my mouth. Oh, it is all so horrible! You don’t know what days I pass! Death would be far less bitter than the life I am leading.”</p>
			<p>As she spoke these words, Aunt Martina buried her face in her hands and began to sob.</p>
			<p>A feeling of intense pity rose in the old fisherman’s heart. In the days of his most grinding poverty he had never been reduced to tears, and to think of the rich, proud Martina Dejas being actually more wretched than an old pauper like himself!</p>
			<p>“I will do my very best,” he said. “Now go, and try not to worry. You had better get off at once, though; it is time for <em>him</em> to be coming back.” She got up, wrapped the petticoat carefully around her head and shoulders, and when Isidoro had looked out to make sure that no one was about who might recognise her, walked slowly away.</p>
			<p>The air was sharp; the wind was blowing in gusts, tearing the first dead leaves from the trees. Aunt Martina, struggling against it, felt more anxious and depressed even than when she came. It seemed as though that chill, autumn wind that shook and lashed and tore her, were tearing and lashing her spirit as well. The presentiments of evil that she had spoken of as haunting her, were stronger than ever. Passing a certain wretched little hovel, more forlorn and poverty-stricken than any of the others, she shot a keen glance at it, and then quickly lowered her eyes, as though in dread lest some invisible being should read the dark thought of her soul. The owner of this hovel, a poor peasant, had come to her some time before, and had asked her to lend him some money. “Lend it to you!” she had exclaimed derisively. “And how do you propose to repay it?” “If I can’t pay you back in money,” the man had replied, “there may be some other way of showing my gratitude. You could require any service at all of me.”</p>
			<p>She understood what he meant. He was ready to undertake anything, even the commission of a crime, in order to get the money he needed. But she had not wanted anything, and so had sent him off. Now, passing the forlorn little house, rapidly falling into ruins, through the darkness and wind, and melancholy of the night, she saw again before her the gaunt, resolute figure of this man; his hollow, sunken eyes; his lips, white from hunger; his dark, bony hands, ready for any act by which he might hope to snatch a little ease and comfort out of life; and the horrible schemes of vengeance that were tearing at her selfish old heart began to take a fearful and well-defined shape.</p>
			<p>Thus she passed on. A dark, forbidding form, enveloped in her black <i>tunic</i>, swept by the wind past that wretched hovel like a shadowy portent of evil.</p>
			<p>That same evening Uncle Isidoro reasoned with Costantino at length, urging him by every argument at his command to avert what otherwise must inevitably result in a catastrophe for himself, for Giovanna, and for every one concerned.</p>
			<p>Costantino regarded the old man steadily with his usual melancholy smile. “What,” he demanded, “could happen? You admit yourself that the old harpy will never talk to her son. And⁠—isn’t she my wife, Giovanna? Haven’t I a perfect right to be with her whenever I choose?”</p>
			<p>“Ah, child of the Lord,” sighed Uncle Isidoro, clasping his hands and shaking his head, “you will be made to suffer for it in some way; you had better look out: Martina Dejas is capable of anything where her son is concerned.”</p>
			<p>A look of hatred came into Costantino’s eyes.</p>
			<p>“Listen,” he said; “my heart is like a vessel full of deadly poison; a single drop more and it will overflow. Let them look out who have brought all this on themselves.” Then he got up and went out into the night. For hours he wandered aimlessly about, like one who had lost his way, in the wind-swept solitude. Then, about midnight, he found himself, almost without knowing how he got there, as on that first evening, beneath Giovanna’s window. He climbed on the shed and tapped.</p>
			<p>Aunt Martina, lying wakeful and alert, heard everything; heard Costantino approach, heard his knock, heard Giovanna open to him; and then she knew it was hopeless. Without doubt Isidoro had faithfully reported his conversation with her, and this was Costantino’s reply: he had come directly and defiantly to Giovanna. “No doubt,” thought the old woman bitterly, “he argues that since old Martina lacks the courage to make her son unhappy by telling him the truth, he may as well profit by her weakness. Yes; no doubt that is what he thinks. But, he has forgotten to take account of what the poor old mother may be stirred up to do in order to protect her boy! Now, Costantino Ledda, it is between us two!”</p>
			<p>One night as Costantino slid down from the shed beneath Giovanna’s window, he felt something cold and sharp enter his side; in the darkness he made out the figure of a man, his face covered with a black cloth. He threw himself upon him, and after a brief struggle, breathless, silent, determined, he succeeded in throwing him down and disarming him. Then he let him go without so much as attempting to identify him. What did it signify who the assassin was? Behind that black mask he knew only too well that Aunt Martina’s gaunt features looked out, and that it was her hand that had directed the murderous stroke.</p>
			<p>He made his way back to Isidoro’s hut, and, the fisherman being absent on one of his journeys, dressed the wound himself, hiding away like a stricken animal, and concealing what had happened from every one. He did not even undress, but for three days and nights lay stretched on his pallet, a prey to the bitterest reflections.</p>
			<p>The weather had become cold; outside, the wind whistled among the dry hedges, and, forcing its way into the hut, made the long threads of cobweb swing back and forth, and brought down clouds of dust from the roof. Through the window Costantino could see processions of pale blue clouds scudding across the cold, bright background of the sky; and he said to himself that he wanted to die.</p>
			<p>Death, death, what else remained for him? The world—his world⁠—was now only a cold and empty void.</p>
			<p>His feeling for Giovanna could never be what it once had been; he had, indeed, resumed his relations with her, but she could never mean the same thing to him again after having deserted him in his hour of need. The very pleasure which he felt in their clandestine intercourse was due in part to his hatred of the Dejases. The Dejases! The mere thought of the joy which his death would afford them, even now, aroused him and put new life into his veins!</p>
			<p>“They have stolen everything else of mine,” he thought, “and now they want to take my life as well. But they shan’t have it; I will kill one of them first.” He recalled a trial at which he had once been present, where the accused had proved that he had been attacked, and had struck back in order to defend himself; the jury had acquitted him. “Well, they will acquit me; I shall be striking in self-defence. And if they don’t acquit me—!” There arose before him the faces of his fellow-convicts. The <i>King of Spades</i> smiled at him lugubriously, and behind him he could see the gloomy walls of the prison courtyard. At least, though, <em>they</em> had been friendly; they might have been murderers, but they had never tried to assassinate him.</p>
			<p>On the third day of his seclusion in Uncle Isidore’s hut a storm came up. Nothing could exceed the comfortless desolation of the poor little abode. The black clouds travelling overhead seemed to break directly against the small, bare window; presently some big drops fell from the roof; one leak in especial, directly over the black, cold fireplace was so persistent that at last, seeing that the water was forming into a thin stream, the young man reached out and shoved Uncle Isidoro’s earthenware saucepan beneath it. Drip, drip, drip, the sound was like the monotonous and melancholy ticking of a clock. Night descended, if anything colder and more dreary than before; the rain came down steadily, and the drops fell into the saucepan with the regularity of a machine. Costantino did not move; he had neither wood wherewith to build a fire, nor any more food, and it did not occur to him to get up, to bestir himself, to go out, to live. Perhaps Uncle Isidoro was stalled in some neighbouring village by the storm, and would not get back.</p>
			<p>During the night fever set in, and Costantino was racked by hideous dreams, painful memories of the past, tempests of anger, mingled with physical suffering. How long he lay in this condition he could never remember, only he recollected hearing the steady drip, drip of the water as it fell into the saucepan, the beating of the rain on the roof, and the long sob of the wind as it swept about the deserted house. In the intervals of the fever, when he would arouse from the lethargy that weighed him down, he was conscious of sharp, shooting pains through all his limbs, similar to those he had felt in prison on awaking after a feverish night; and also of a savage, animal desire to do some harm, to fling himself on some one or some thing, and bite, and tear, and destroy. Another day and night went by. The rain was falling more heavily than ever, and that steady, inexorable drip, drip had at last filled and overflowed the saucepan. Between cold and starvation Costantino had almost come to the end of his forces. Once he was visited by a horrid illusion. He thought that a mad dog had thrown him down and bitten him in the stomach. He awoke shaking, and could not throw the idea off; perhaps he had been bitten by a mad dog, and this was hydrophobia! Towards evening the storm died down, though the rain did not cease entirely. Then, suddenly, he felt that he was dying; he had no sense of rebellion now; all that was over; he seemed to have lost even the power to care. To die, to die⁠—Why should he want to go on living? Everything both within him and about him was black and void. Through all his fever-ridden dreams one idea had remained persistently by him—that he was about to commit a crime. Now it was Aunt Martina whom he was on the point of stabbing; then some one else; but in the intervals of consciousness he realised that should he live, should he once more find himself burdened with the dolorous gift of existence, while he would not even attempt to resist the secret force that was urging him on, it would matter little against whom his fury expended itself; it might be Aunt Martina, or Brontu, or some one else. But then⁠—then—deep down in his soul he could never rid himself of a sense of terror of <i>what would happen afterwards</i>. Yes; he wanted to die, so as to suffer no more and to be saved from becoming a murderer.</p>
			<p>At last the rain was ceasing; it still fell steadily, but more, now, like a gentle shower, while the wind had died down completely. It was cold, though, and the damp, chill atmosphere hung over the cabin like a heavy wet cloth. So unutterably dreary were the weather and the surroundings that Costantino, recalling the periods of his most acute misery, could never remember being so utterly and hopelessly wretched as now. Not even on the day of the sentence, not even on the day when they had told him of the divorce, nor on that other day of his return: for on every one of those occasions, desperate as the outlook had been, there always remained the hope of better things in the life to come. Then his conscience had been pure; but now, should he go on living, he believed that he would surely forfeit all hope in the life to come. At times, goaded by this horror, he would cry aloud, imploring death to come and save him, as a terrified child cries for its mother.</p>
			<p>Thus the hours wore on; he had dropped into a feverish sleep, but awoke suddenly, trembling with terror at he could not tell what. The rain was over at last, but in the profound stillness that enwrapped him, Costantino fancied that he still heard it beating on the roof, and the drip, drip from the leak over the fireplace; only now the sounds seemed to come from far, far away, from a world that was already remote. He thought that he was already dead, or lingering on the extremest confines of life, in a place of shadows, of silence, of mystery. What would he find there⁠—just beyond? The light of eternity, or—the darkness of eternity? He was afraid to open his eyes; he tried to cry out, but could not utter a sound. Then⁠—a knock came on the door. The sound dragged him back from that vague tide on which he was floating; he opened his eyes without moving, conscious both of relief and regret at finding himself still alive.</p>
			<p>The knocking was repeated louder than before. Who could it be? Not Uncle Isidoro; he would have called out.</p>
			<p>Costantino neither stirred nor spoke. Possibly he had not the strength to get up, but in any case he had no wish to. Why must they come to disturb him? dragging him back from those mysterious shores on which he had almost set foot.</p>
			<p>Meanwhile the knocking continued still more vigorously, but after a little it ceased, and everything became perfectly still. A short time elapsed; then some one again approached the hut; presently the end of a stout stick was thrust under the door, serving as a lever; the frail barrier, secured only by a metal hasp, quickly yielded, and the figure of a woman, with a skirt thrown over her head and shoulders, appeared for a moment in the opening; stepping inside, she turned and replaced the rickety door before Costantino was able to recognise her. There was a moment of breathless silence, during which he could hear his visitor groping her way about, in the pitchy darkness, on the other side of the hut; then she spoke, and he recognised the voice of Aunt Bachissia.</p>
			<p>“Costantino! Are you there? Where are you? Are you dead or alive? Why don’t you answer? Some one said you had not been seen for three days, and that Isidoro Pane was away. I came once before and knocked and knocked, but you wouldn’t answer. What’s the matter? are you sick?”</p>
			<p>Still he made no reply, burying his face like a sulky child.</p>
			<p>“My soul!” moaned the woman, “he must be ill as well.”</p>
			<p><em>As well!</em> Then some one else was ill! Who, he wondered. Perhaps Giovanna. He listened intently, still keeping his face covered.</p>
			<p>“He has no fire and no light!” she muttered. “What does it all mean? Wait, I’ll strike a light. Where are my matches?”</p>
			<p>The pale, blue flame of a sulphur match shot up for a moment, and then suddenly died away.</p>
			<p>Costantino could see nothing, but he heard Aunt Bachissia stumbling her way towards him, moaning: “Costantino, Costantino!”</p>
			<p>A wave of anger swept over him; he tried to cry out, to rise and fling himself upon her, choke her⁠—but he was powerless. A cold sweat broke out all over him, and he knew that if he attempted so much as to speak, he would burst into tears. How hatefully weak he was!</p>
			<p>Aunt Bachissia struck another match, and began searching for a light of some sort, but all she could find was a rude iron lamp hanging on a nail, with neither wick nor oil. Then she groped her way to the fireplace, and, stooping down, held out her hand with the lighted match between her fingers. There were the saucepan full of water, the heap of wet ashes, the soaked hearthstone, and beyond, half in the circle of light, the figure of Costantino extended motionless on the pallet. The match flared up and then went out, and all became again perfectly dark and silent.</p>
			<p>For a moment Aunt Bachissia did not stir; she hardly seemed to breathe; then a long, choking sob broke from her.</p>
			<p>Of what had she been thinking in that moment of silence and darkness? Did that vision of Costantino lying apparently dead before her awaken a sudden, agonising sense of what she had done; of her iniquitous responsibility in the ruin that had been wrought in Giovanna’s and Costantino’s lives, and in the lives of every one concerned in the melancholy drama? Throwing herself on the floor beside the pallet, she passed her hands tremblingly over his body and face, sobbing in the darkness and silence: “Costantino, Costantino! are you alive? Answer me⁠—⁠Yes,” she murmured presently, “he is alive, but ill, ill—you are ill, aren’t you?” she went on coaxingly. “Is it a wound? Ah, God! If you only knew what terrible things have happened! Giovanna sent me; she was frightened, you know; she thought you might have been hurt, that some one might have been lying in wait for you; she’s more dead than alive herself—Costantino—!”</p>
			<p>At last Costantino gave a moan; something hard in his breast seemed to melt; he was moved⁠—affected. Then he was not forgotten, after all; Giovanna had been anxious; she had sent to find out about him; she was frightened, unhappy. Then, in his changed mood, Aunt Bachissia’s words of a moment before came back to him with fresh meaning. “He is ill <em>as well</em>,” she had said. Who was this other person who was ill? Again he thought of Giovanna, and his heart sank.</p>
			<p>“Is it a wound?” she repeated.</p>
			<p>“Yes,” murmured Costantino.</p>
			<p>“Who did it?”</p>
			<p>“I don’t know; some one hired by Aunt Martina Dejas.”</p>
			<p>“Ah!” cried Aunt Bachissia, her voice thick with anger; then, in a changed tone, she said: “The saying goes that God does not pay on Saturday⁠—well⁠—Brontu Dejas is dying—poor wretch!”</p>
			<p>Costantino felt as though an electric shock had gone through him; he started to his feet, swayed, and fell back on his knees. In the darkness his hands encountered those of Aunt Bachissia, and she felt that they were scorching hot and trembling.</p>
			<p>“Costantino! my soul!” she cried, alarmed lest in his weak and exhausted condition the shock of her news had been too great for him. “Costantino, what is it? You are shaking all over like a little kid! Yes; Brontu is very ill. He came back yesterday; it was a holiday, you know, and he came home so drunk that he was like something crazy. It seems that he has been drinking all the time lately, even up at the sheepfolds. So then yesterday when he came in he was horribly drunk, and he began quarrelling with his mother and Giovanna, and tried to beat them; they were so frightened that they ran up and locked themselves in their rooms. Brontu stayed down in the kitchen, and he must have stretched himself out alongside the fire. After some time they heard him crying out, but they thought it was just some drunken foolishness, and did not go down to see what it was. After a while, though, when he had become quiet, Aunt Martina went and found him lying there unconscious and frightfully burned. He had evidently fallen asleep and had put his legs right over the fire,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-10" id="noteref-10" epub:type="noteref">10</a> and then his clothing caught. There was an empty brandy bottle lying beside him. He hasn’t come to since, and the doctor says he can’t live through the night. Poor Brontu; he wasn’t bad; he was weak, but not really bad⁠—Costantino! Costantino!—what on earth is it? What are you doing?” For in the darkness Aunt Bachissia, who had told her story with moans and sighs of sympathy, partly for Costantino, partly for Brontu, heard what she at first took to be a burst of insane laughter. The young man’s hands became rigid, his limbs contracted, and for one wild moment she thought he had lost his reason. Then the truth broke upon her; he was crying, weeping bitterly, half from weakness and reaction, but half, too, from horror and sympathy at the awful ending of a man whom, but a short while before, he had thought that he hated so much that he was in danger of killing him.</p>
			<p>That same night Brontu died, and some time later Giovanna and Costantino were reunited. Old Aunt Martina, absorbed in her grief and completely shattered by it, like an oak-tree that has been struck by lightning, offered no objection, but neither did she forgive the young people, and she demanded that the little Mariedda should be left under her care. Thus the two, the old woman and the child, lived on in the white house, while Giovanna and Costantino returned to the little grey cottage. There, after a time, another child was born to them⁠—Malthineddu.</p>
			<p>It is a soft spring day. Overhead the sky is a tender blue, and all around the village the fields of grain sway like the waves of a green, encircling sea. Aunt Martina sits on the portico, spinning, and praying silently; a white, tragic figure, spiritualised by sorrow.</p>
			<p>Aunt Bachissia sits spinning likewise, before the door of the cottage. Giovanna is sewing, and hard by Costantino works at his bench. No one speaks, but the thoughts of all are turned on the past.</p>
			<p>In the middle of the common Mariedda and Malthineddu are playing together with gurgles and shouts of joyous laughter, as happy and unconcerned as the birds on the neighbouring hedges.</p>
			<p>Hither and thither they go, trotting from Aunt Martina to Costantino, from Aunt Bachissia to Giovanna, from Giovanna to Aunt Martina. And each in turn, even the desolate, heartbroken old grandmother, looks up to receive them with a smile of tender indulgence. They are the invisible woof of peace and mutual forgiveness.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
